Prepare `Core` runtime API for MBMs (#13)
polkadot-fellows/RFCs: text/0013-prepare-blockbuilder-and-core-runtime-apis-for-mbms.md

In a similar fashion, it should not hinder the future addition of a `System::PostInherents` callback that always runs after all inherents were applied.

## Stakeholders

- Substrate Maintainers: They have to implement this, including tests, audit and
  maintenance burden.
- Polkadot Runtime developers: They will have to adapt the runtime files to this breaking change.
- Polkadot Parachain Teams: They have to adapt to the breaking changes but then eventually have
  multi-block migrations available.

## Explanation

### `Core::initialize_block`

This runtime API function is changed from returning `()` to `ExtrinsicInclusionMode`:

```patch
fn initialize_block(header: &<Block as BlockT>::Header)
+  -> ExtrinsicInclusionMode;
```

With `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` is defined as:

```rust
enum ExtrinsicInclusionMode {
  /// All extrinsics are allowed in this block.
  AllExtrinsics,
  /// Only inherents are allowed in this block.
  OnlyInherents,
}
```

> A block author MUST respect the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` that is returned by `initialize_block`. The runtime MUST reject blocks that have extrinsics in them while `OnlyInherents` was returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A block author MUST respect the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` that is returned by `initialize_block`. The runtime MUST reject blocks that have non-inherent extrinsics in them while `OnlyInherents` was returned.
```

nit, or else we have got the definition wrong here: https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sp_runtime/generic/struct.UncheckedExtrinsic.html

Although these namings probably need revision based on https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/2280 as well

Author: Oh thanks, yea this was def wrong before.

| **Description** | Prepares the `BlockBuilder` and `Core` Runtime APIs for Multi-Block-Migrations. |
| **Authors**     | Oliver Tale-Yazdi |

## Summary

Introduces breaking changes to the `BlockBuilder` and `Core` runtime APIs and bumps them to version
5 and 7 respectively. A new hook `after_inherents` is added to the `BlockBuilder` runtime API and
the `initialize_block` function of `Core` is changed to return an enum to indicate what extrinsics
and hooks can be executed.

## Motivation

The original motivation is Multi-Block-Migrations. They require the runtime to be able to tell the
block builder that it should not attempt to include transactions in the current block. Currently,
there is no communication possible between runtime and block builder that could achieve this.
Further, it is necessary to execute logic right after inherent application but still before
transaction inclusion.

This RFC proposes a way of communication between the runtime and the block builder by changing the
`initialize_block` function to return a `BlockExecutiveMode` enum. Additionally, an
`after_inherents` function is introduced that runs after inherent but before transaction

> application.  

Reviewer 2: Random remark: why not make `after_inherents` return the `BlockExecutiveMode`, instead of `initialize_block`? Then it would just indicate to the client whether the block authorship should continue or stop now.

Author: Thanks for the comment, originally it was implemented like this.  
But then came up the idea of optional inherents: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14414#issuecomment-1606262686, and with that the need to already communicate this `Mode` before the inherents get applied. In general this allows for more freedom already before generating inherents. 

Does it sounds good to you?

Reviewer 2: > then came up the idea of optional inherents

The comment you linked is Basti asking what optional inherents are, because as far as I understand there's no such thing as an optional inherent at the moment.

I'm not very opinionated, it just seems to me that the design is a tiny bit weirder than it could be.

Author: Yes the runtime could alter the return value of `inherent_extrinsics` :thinking:   

There is still this one [comment from Gav](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/14414#issuecomment-1602222428) which mentions to already having two modes prior to inherent application.

Author: `after_inherents` was now gladly removed.

3. New callback `System::PostInherents`: Can replace `on_initialize`/`on_finalize` where a hard deadline is required (complements `poll`). It is guaranteed to execute each block.

These three features can be implemented when fulfilling these two requirements:
1. The runtime can tell the block author to not include any transactions in the block.
2. The runtime can execute logic right after all pallet-provided inherents have been applied.

## Stakeholders

- Substrate Maintainers: They have to implement this, including tests, audit and
  maintenance burden.
- Polkadot Runtime developers: They will have to adapt the runtime files to this breaking change.
- Polkadot Parachain Teams: They also have to adapt to the breaking changes but then eventually have
  multi-block migrations available.

## Explanation

### `Core::initialize_block`

This runtime API function is changed from returning `()` to `ExtrinsicInclusionMode`:
```rust
enum ExtrinsicInclusionMode {
  /// All extrinsics are allowed in this block.
  AllExtrinsics,
  /// Only inherents are allowed in this block.
  OnlyInherents,
}
```

> A block author MUST respect the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` that is returned by `initialize_block`. The runtime MAY reject blocks that violate this requirement. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A block author SHOULD respect the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` that is returned by `initialize_block`. The runtime will reject any non-inherent transaction, meaning the block author would only waste computation time. 
```

Reviewer 2: IMO "MUST" is better.
The runtime isn't meant to try to detect bugs in the host, because it can't anyway. It can only assume that the host behaves as expected. In that specific situation, the runtime is able to detect bugs in the host, but I don't see why we should create an exception here just because it's possible.
I'd even suggest that the runtime panics if the host ignores the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode`.

Reviewer 3: > I'd even suggest that the runtime panics if the host ignores the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode`.

Yeah 100%. This is what "will reject" means.

Author: I was using `MAY` since the inherent Extrinsic could have been a storage No-OP, in which case the runtime would have no way of detecting it.  
But it is probably easier to use `MUST` here.

It is RECOMMENDED that block authors keep transactions in their transaction pool (if applicable)
for as long as `initialize_block` returns `OnlyInherents`. The assumption is that these transactions become valid once the runtime finishes the MBM.  
Backwards compatibility with the current runtime API SHOULD be implemented by block authors to not mandate a lockstep update of the authoring software.  

> This could be achieved by checking the runtime API version and assuming that `initialize_block` does not have a return value when the version is lower than 7.

Reviewer 3: Not sure we need this paragraph.

Author: Okay, less text = less bugs 😄

### `BlockBuilder::last_inherent`

A block author MUST always invoke `last_inherent` directly after applying all runtime-provided inherents. The runtime MAY reject blocks that violate this requirement.

### Combined

Coming back to the three main features and how they can be implemented with these runtime APIs changes:

> **1. Multi-Block-Migrations**: The runtime is being put into lock-down mode for the duration of the migration process by returning `OnlyInherents` from `initialize_block`. This ensures that no user provided transaction can interfere with the migration process. It is absolutely necessary to ensure this, since otherwise a transaction could call into un-migrated storage and violate storage invariants. The entry-point for the MBM logic is `last_inherent`. This is a good spot, because any data that is touched in inherents, is not MBM-migratable anyway. It could also be done before all other inherents or at the end of the block in `finalize_block`, but there is no downside from doing it in `last_inherent` and the other two features are in favour of this.

Reviewer 3: > This is a good spot, because any data that is touched in inherents, is not MBM-migratable anyway

This is not entirely true. Things like the parachain consensus system could still be migrated by a MBM. This would require that the `provide_inherent` call returns an empty "inherent", aka doesn't attach any data to it.

Author: I dont quite get what you mean. What i wanted to express is, that the logic of an inherent could try to decode storage that should currently not be accessed since an MBM is ongoing.

Author: Sentence was removed.

> **1. Multi-Block-Migrations**: The runtime is being put into lock-down mode for the duration of the migration process by returning `OnlyInherents` from `initialize_block`. This ensures that no user provided transaction can interfere with the migration process. It is absolutely necessary to ensure this, since otherwise a transaction could call into un-migrated storage and violate storage invariants. The entry-point for the MBM logic is `last_inherent`. This is a good spot, because any data that is touched in inherents, is not MBM-migratable anyway. It could also be done before all other inherents or at the end of the block in `finalize_block`, but there is no downside from doing it in `last_inherent` and the other two features are in favour of this.

Reviewer 4: > The runtime is being put into lock-down mode for the duration of the migration process

So a pallet with a slow multi-block migration, will block all other pallets until it's fully migrated. I guess that is the only way we can safely put all transactions from the pool on pause until the mbm and lock-down mode is over.

| **Start Date**  | July 24, 2023 |
| **Description** | Prepare the `BlockBuilder` and `Core` Runtime APIs for Multi-Block-Migrations.|
| **Authors**     | Oliver Tale-Yazdi |

## Summary

Introduces breaking changes to the `BlockBuilder` and `Core` runtime APIs and bumps them to version
5 and 7 respectively. A new function `after_inherents` is added to the `BlockBuilder` runtime API
and the `initialize_block` function of `Core` is changed to return an enum to indicate what
extrinsics can be applied.

## Motivation

The original motivation is Multi-Block-Migrations. They require the runtime to be able to tell the
block builder that it should not attempt to include transactions in the current block. Currently,
there is no communication possible between runtime and block builder that could achieve this.
Further, it is necessary to execute runtime logic right after inherent application but still before
transaction inclusion.

This RFC proposes a way of communication between the runtime and the block builder by changing the
`initialize_block` function to return a `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` enum. Additionally, an

> `after_inherents` function is introduced that runs after inherent but before transaction

Reviewer 5: This sentence is redundant

application.  

## Stakeholders

- Substrate Maintainers: They will have to implement this upstream with all the testing, audit and
  maintenance burden.
- Polkadot Runtime developers: They will have to adapt to this breaking change.
- Polkadot Parachain Teams: They also have to adapt to the breaking changes but then eventually have
  multi-block migrations available.

## Explanation

The only relevant change is on the node side in the block authoring logic. Any further preparation
for MBMs can happen entirely on the runtime side with the provided primitives.

All block authors MUST respect the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` that is returned by `initialize_block`.

> They MUST always invoke `after_inherents` directly after inherent application. The runtime MAY

Reviewer 5: what parameters does `after_inherents` take? Is there any way to limit the amount of weight this can spend?

The use-case I'm thinking of is consensus algorithms where the amount of time which can be spent in authoring is variable, e.g. asynchronous backing scenarios where some blocks might be authored in a full 2 seconds and others only in 1 second.

Currently, block builders have the ability to gauge how heavy transactions are, and to stop authoring after submitting enough transactions.

Block builders should be able to limit the amount of time spent in `after_inherents`, although probably not arbitrarily.

Perhaps the `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` should return a minimum amount of weight that must be allotted to the rest of the block, so block builders can decide whether to simply give up authoring or continue.

Reviewer 5: To some extent I'm wondering if it makes sense to flip block-building inside out - in theory we could have a single `fn build_block(InherentData, some_total_weight_or_time_limit)` and supply new transactions through special host functions instead, so the runtime actually decides whether to pull transactions from the pool, etc.

Reviewer 3: Weight is a runtime concept. How much weight you want to spent is also something that the runtime should decide and not the node. All information that you want to pass between initialize and after inherents, can be stored temporarily in the state and doesn't need to be passed to the function.

Regarding driving the block production from inside the runtime. I think there exist an issue or we at least discussed it at some point. The main problem being a panic in a transaction. We can not unwind the panic. We would may need to spawn a new was instance to ensure block production isn't affected by a panic.

Reviewer 5: > How much weight you want to spent is also something that the runtime should decide and not the node.

I disagree - there's no good way for the runtime to know how much time is available for authoring in the general case.

reject a block that violates either of those requirements.

Enum `ExtrinsicInclusionMode` has two variants:  
- `AllExtrinsics`: All extrinsics can be applied. It is the default behaviour prior to this RFC.
- `OnlyInherents`: Only inherents SHALL be applied by the block author. This differs from the
  current behaviour by omitting transactions.

It is RECOMMENDED that block authors keep transactions in the local transaction pool (if applicable)
for as long as `initialize_block` returns `OnlyInherents`.  
Backwards compatibility with the current runtime API SHOULD be implemented on the node side to not
mandate a lockstep update.

## Drawbacks

[…] drawbacks relating to performance, ergonomics, user experience, security, or privacy: None

The only drawback is that the block execution logic becomes more complicated. There is more room for
error.  

> Downstream developers will also need to adapt their code to this breaking change.

Reviewer 5: Do we have a good definition of breaking changes? This seems to be opt-in and doesn't break node-side code unless the user's runtime is updated.
